

Project: Graphics in a Window
=============================

* Operating System
* compiler
* Library
* Standard Library

TODO: Is it responsible not to introduce closures up to this point?


### Step 1: New Project

TODO: we need a link to the intro/fundament example here.


#### [Snapshot] Step 1
[download files](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/releases/tag/graphout01_new-project)
|
[see changes](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/commit/c7dd93813e05d4142ad64fa903013cfa22331f30)

#### [Testing] Step 1
TODO: we need a link to the intro/fundament example here.


### Step 2: Access the Windowmanagement (and Graphics Output)

The _operating system_ offers functionality for opening a window. In order to use this, we need to `use` a number of _libraries_

```
use glutin_window::GlutinWindow as Window;
use piston::window::WindowSettings;
```

In other examples it was enough to `use std::sync` and then the program could be compiled. In this case the situation is a little different. We get an *ERROR*:

```
error: unresolved import `glutin_window::GlutinWindow`. Maybe a missing `extern crate glutin_window`? [E0432]
src/main.rs:1 use glutin_window::GlutinWindow as Window;
                  ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

The reason why the build system is not happy this time is because `glutin_window` it is not part of the rust _standard library. Refer to the extern crates like this:
```
extern crate piston;
extern crate glutin_window;
```

There is another error we have to address:

```
error: can't find crate for `piston` [E0463]
```

We refer to an _extern_ crate, integrate it into our program by its name `piston` and `glutin_window`. Since the crates in question are not part of the standard library, cargo will have to download them. What it wants to know now is which version it should get (and from which source etc).

Add the following to the `[dependencies]` section in `Cargo.toml`:

```
piston = "0.24.0"
pistoncore-glutin_window = "0.28.0"
```

Instead of `println!("Hello, world!");` we can now create a new window like this:

```
fn main() {
    let window: Window =
        WindowSettings::new("Hello World!", [512; 2])
            .build().unwrap();
}
```

#### [Snapshot] Step 2
[download files](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/releases/tag/graphout02_open-window)
|
[see changes](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/commit/3495e498198651826cb58e27c0fcdeb7d9f15064)

#### [Testing] Step 2

`cargo build` should output something like

```
Compiling graphout v0.1.0 (file:///home/broe/projets/RustWorkshop/minimals/graphout)
src/main.rs:8:9: 8:15 warning: unused variable: `window`, #[warn(unused_variables)] on by default
src/main.rs:8     let window: Window =
                   ^~~~~~
 Finished debug [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 1.50 secs
```

Don't worry about the `unused variable` warning for now.

Running the program `cargo run` gives the console output

```
    Finished debug [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.0 secs
     Running `target/debug/graphout`
```

Otherwise not much is happening. The careful observer (using a not too fast machine) may recognise a quick flash of a window or icon in the application louncher bar. So there is some interaction going on between our program and the operating system.

Despite not useful in itself, having those two components 'talk to each other' at all is a good result for now.


### Step 3: Event loop

The window 'just flashes' because our application quits immediately after lounching it. It follows the Scheme
* start
* run (from first to last instruction)
* terminate.

What we want is something like
* start
* run
* terminate, when the user 'closes the application'.

That is, the application reacts to event(s) which are generated outside the application: The user closes the window, presses `escape`, etc. First progress  towards reacting to events would be not to terminate (at all).

After creating the window we just loop infinitely (just add this line before the final `}`:

```
loop { }
```

#### [Snapshot] Step 3a
[download files](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/releases/tag/graphout03a_infinite-loop)
|
[see changes](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/commit/5cc87606651ac43ad0aeb7c00e30ed48fba96be7)

#### [Testing] Step 3a

It does the job, the window remains visible, containing weird mixture of background and titlebar... well, after all, we have created and 'registered' a window at the window management system of the _operating system_ but our application does not care about anything. It just loops infinitely.


Next, we need access to the events generated by the operating system's window management. In particular, it will provide a set of informations the _graphics library_ would need to 'draw things correctly'; window position, size etc.

One more dependency: `piston2d-opengl_graphics = "0.31.0"`.

Providing us an `extern crate opengl_graphics;` so that we can `use opengl_graphics::{GlGraphics, OpenGL};`.
Finally, we initialise the graphics system which we can now use.

```
let opengl = OpenGL::V3_2;
let gl = GlGraphics::new(opengl);
```

#### [Snapshot] Step 3b
[download files](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/releases/tag/graphout03b_opengl_graphics)
|
[see changes](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/commit/a74eabff42f439c633323ea22f4f1f82a00c07e2)

#### [Testing] Step 3b

`cargo build` should give:

```
   Compiling graphout v0.1.0 (file:///home/broe/projets/RustWorkshop/minimals/graphout)
src/main.rs:10:9: 10:15 warning: unused variable: `window`, #[warn(unused_variables)] on by default
src/main.rs:10     let window: Window =
                       ^~~~~~
src/main.rs:15:9: 15:11 warning: unused variable: `gl`, #[warn(unused_variables)] on by default
src/main.rs:15     let gl = GlGraphics::new(opengl);
                       ^~
    Finished debug [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 1.60 secs
```
No missing dependencies, all extern crates are there.
Complaints about unused variables are fine, we will use them in a minute.

Now, we replace the 'non-reactive' infinite loop with something that has the potential to react to events happening to the window, the keyboard and so on.

We will need:
```
use piston::event_loop::Events;
use piston::input::RenderEvent;
```

`window` and `gl` need to be mutable. We also will need to declare

```
let mut events = window.events();
```

The great change is to replace `loop {}` with an (admittedly not exactly trivial) construct that will also loop infinitely:
```

+    for e in events.next(&mut window) {
+        if let Some(r) = e.render_args() {
+            gl.draw(r.viewport(), |c, gl| {
+                // all  drawing actions will happen here soon
+            });
+        }
+    }
```

* In every loop cycle it provides an event `e`.

* If the `e` has some render arguments attached to it `if let Some(r) = e.render_args()` . . .
* . . . we activate the graphics system via `gl.draw(...)`
* which gets additional information about how and where to draw based on `r.viewport()`

#### [Snapshot] Step 3c
[download files](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/releases/tag/graphout03c_eventloop%2Bwindow)
|
[see changes](https://github.com/broesamle/RustWorkshop/commit/0f66156843c0732821572b34ff1bf453f4d303ed)

#### [Testing] Step 3c
The main difference is that now, we can close the window by pressing the close button `(x)` in the title bar. Again, this is not spectacular in itself but it indicates progress towards a smooth integration with the window system.

[NEXT: Multithreaded Console Output](multiprint.md)
